As some readers may be aware, [I roast coffee at
home](http://giftsoutright.tumblr.com/post/57705969085/casual-home-coffee-roasting-the-best-coffee-for-the),
and have done so for going on three years. For the first two and half
years, I roasted with a hot air popcorn popper (as I discuss in the
above link). But when my popcorn popper died, and the replacement died
immediately too, I decided, after consultation with [my friend Brian
Gumm](https://twitter.com/RoastedOnRoss), to start roasting with a heat
gun instead.

Heat gun roasting, however, is not [Sweet
Maria’s](http://www.sweetmarias.com)-supported, so whereas you can learn
all you need to know about roasting with a popper on a single website in
a short amount of time, it’s much harder to educate yourself about heat
gun roasting. So I’m putting up this post to aggregate a few of the best
resources I found and add a few of my notes on how to roast
successfully. I’ve done about a dozen roasts now with the heat gun now,
so I feel like I have the basics down, but these should still be taken
as initial notes–and I’ll likely update this post later.

### Why you should roast with a heat gun

A popcorn popper is still the most sensible option if you’re just
getting started with home coffee roasting, because it’s hard to screw up
and a great way to learn the ropes. However, a heat gun offers one major
advantage–the ability to roast more than about a half-cup of
beans–without being significantly more complicated or more expensive.
You could probably roast a pound at a time with a heat gun, and although
you should know a little bit more about the changes the beans go through
as they roast, it’s not that much more than you need to know for popper
roasting. An added benefit, once you get familiar with the process, is
that you have a lot more control over the roast and the ability to tweak
it for better flavor. But the bottom line is that whereas with a popper
I was roasting about every other day, with the heat gun I roast about
every 4-5 days.

*Further coffee geekery after the break.*

### Resources

[The most comprehensive
guide](http://coffeecrone.com/roasting/breadmachine.htm), via Brian
Gumm.

[The most useful
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=boUmoMN4QXI&feature=youtu.be),
involving roasting in a metal bowl rather than a bread machine.

[Another useful video](https://vusay.com/yt/TLMubk5DH7A).

[And another](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8VlOOuJZQQ4).

[And here’s a fun
setup](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LivLKX9L6Rk&list=UUyWbbmuQVZo6ALU_HMsesvg).

UPDATE: [this sample from Scott Rao’s
book](http://scottrao.com/Coffee-Roasters-Companion.pdf "Coffee Roaster's Companion") (justifiably
expensive in total) has a couple of helpful, digestible tips.

You can also find tips on listserv archives and forums, but that’s a lot
of work and I don’t have reaily-available links to anything crucial.

### My notes

These are going to reference that first video link, because that’s the
closest to how I do it.

At the moment ,I roast in a metal bowl rather than a bread machine–this
is just because I haven’t found a used bread machine yet, but I’m
totally satisfied with the bowl method, and I may not even invest the
money in a bread machine. It requires a little more physical effort, but
it’s not bad.

I skip the trick from the video where the guy puts the smaller bowl
inside–I found myself jostling the smaller bowl no matter how hard I
tried to avoid it, with the result that beans would get stuck under the
little bowl and fail to roast.

Instead, I have found it to be very important to **preheat the bowl**
for a couple of minutes before I put the beans in. This reduces my time
to first crack from around 10 minutes to around 6 or 7. This is not only
efficient, but if you’re aiming for lighter roasts (as I am), you’ll get
better flavor from a faster roast development, and make sure to avoid
undesirable “baked” notes.

I avoid stirring the coffee with the heat gun (as the guy in the video
does), because I have had occasions where a bean will get stuck in the
gun and burn to a cinder. YMMV depending on your heat gun, though. I do
hold the gun as close as I can to the beans until I get to first crack,
and keep my heat gun on its hottest setting (I bought the cheapest,
smallest one from Home Depot, and it has two settings) for the whole
roast.

**Once first crack starts, however, I’ve found it to be necessary to
hold the gun farther from the beans**, or you can end up crashing
through into second crack way too fast. That’s obviously a problem if
you want to keep the roast light, but even if you want it darker it will
taste better if there’s about 2-3 minutes between first and second
crack.

For cooling, I use a pizza pan rather than a colander–because I had it
and wasn’t using it for anything else, and because it works. I just hold
it in front of a box fan and shake it to cool the beans. That’s not
optimal, but it works, and it’s less high-stakes than using water, which
makes me nervous that I’ll end up drenching the beans.

As my previous post on this states, my priority in coffee roasting is to
make it simple for myself. I’m not a hard-core roasting expert or a
gadget-making tinkerer, although I do obsessively refine any process
like this that I perform regularly. This is a little more fussy than
popper roasting, but it still works for me as a full-time employee/PhD
student/father of a toddler/husband.

I’d love to hear other tips, see other resources, or answer questions,
so get in touch if you have feedback. I may update this post in the
future, as I’m really putting it up to help address the lack of
easy-to-find resources on this roasting method.

**Update 10/23/14:**

I’ve been roasting long enough now to offer a few more tips. 

If you are shopping for a heat gun, I would recommend getting one with
no less wattage than 1200.[This is the one I
have](http://www.homedepot.com/p/Wagner-HT1000-1200-Watt-Heat-Gun-0503008/100048744),
and I find myself wishing I could get more heat out of it, so if it’s in
your budget, I would spring for something bigger. I’ve found that
roasting a whole pound does not work well with my current setup, and I’m
concerned that lower ambient temperatures going into winter may really
affect my roast–both of which concerns would be addressed by a heftier
gun.

After I mastered the basic technique, I’ve begun to explore using the
manual control afforded by the heat gun method to achieve certain roast
profiles. I’m not using a thermometer (yet), so this is purely based on
observation. Right now I’m working on accomplishing the roast curve
outlined by [Scott
Rao](http://www.scottrao.com/Coffee-Roasters-Companion.pdf), in which
the coffee undergoes an initial spike of heat, then a drop followed by a
curve up to first crack, then completing the roast within about 25-30%
of the total roast time. To achieve that technique, I’m trying a couple
of things: in the first minute or so of the roast, I stir the coffee
only minimally, to produce that heat spike. Then when I get to first
crack, I keep the heat on high (the gun as close as possible to the
beans) for about the first minute of the roast, then back off by about
an inch until the completion of the roast.

Comments?
