---
layout: post 
title: "Updated: Casual Home Coffee Roasting"
date: 2018-01-05
categories: coffee
permalink: /casual-home-coffee-roasting/
---

*This post was originally published on my Tumblr in 2013. I have cleaned it up a bit for republication.*

Roasting coffee at home is one of those hobbies that has the reputation of being, as someone put it to me on Twitter, pretty hardcore. But if you haven't got space in your life for that sort of hobby, what I call "casual home coffee roasting" still can make a lot of sense. Its value proposition is basically this: medium-to-high quality coffee (better than Starbucks, though not as good as, say, Intelligentsia) for less than $10 a pound and about half an hour of your time a week. If that sounds worth it to you, read on.

Most online resources about coffee roasting go down the rabbit hole into roast levels, tasting notes, processing methods, etc. etc. etc. I do find that stuff mildly interesting, but most people - including me - don't have the time for it all. In fact if you don’t take a hardcore approach home coffee roasting is not that hard to do, and it offers **the best cost/value proposition available.**

**With casual home coffee roasting, you can have a mid- to high-quality coffee for less than $10 a pound, and with a time expenditure of about half an hour a week, if that.**

To pursue this pragmatic, cash-and-time-saving hobby, you need (1) a roaster of some kind, (2) a basic acquintance with roasting principles, and (3) green coffee. 

***

Let me break it down for you. I bought [a West Bend Air Crazy popcorn
popper](http://www.sweetmarias.com/sweetmarias/coffee-roasters/air-roasters/west-bend-air-crazy-hot-air-popper.html)
for \$20 at Target–that’s my roaster. The only other equipment you need
for roasting is a bowl to catch the chaff and some sort of colander or
pizza pan to cool the beans.

You’ll want to acquaint yourself generally with the roast levels so you
know what to look for, and the place to go for that is [Sweet
Maria’s](http://www.sweetmarias.com/instructions.php). Here’s where
things can get really complex, as people try to find the perfect roast
level for a certain bean. It may be heresy to say it among hardcore
roasters, but I don’t fuss with that too much–I like a lighter roast, so
I generally go just past first crack (the sound the beans make as they
shed their chaff) for most beans. This takes about 4-7 minutes with my
machine, depending on the surrounding temperature.

You then buy [a sampler pack of green coffee beans from Sweet
Maria’s](http://www.sweetmarias.com/sweetmarias/coffee/samplers/green-coffee-sampler.html?source=side),
which is the cheapest buying option at about \$5 a pound. (Yes, you read
that right.) You don’t get to choose your varietals, but since we’re
taking a casual approach that just eliminates more wonkiness. And you
get to try lots of different coffees–I’ve never found one I didn’t like.
All to the good.

You can roast about a half a cup at a time, which tends to last my wife
and I a day or two. Although this means you’re roasting frequently, it
also means you get the freshest possible roast, which is the biggest
factor in getting good flavor.

I’m not pretending that this casual roasting process gets you the best
coffee. It frankly doesn’t match the level of top roasters like
Intelligentsia, Sump, or Philz. To match those guys, you have to get
hardcore. But it’s far, far better than Starbuck’s or your local grocery
store coffee. **And it’s much cheaper than both**.

Whereas high-end fresh coffees like Intelligentsia will run you around
\$17-20 a pound, and terrible stale mass-market coffees like Starbuck’s
will cost $11 a pound or so, casual home roasting gets you fresh coffee with
little fuss for around \$5 a pound and change, even factoring in the
minimal cost of equipment. **This makes it the best cost/value
proposition available for good coffee**.

So, to sum up: \$20 of setup equipment and an hour of reading gets you
the capacity to roast your own coffee. The chore of roasting takes you
about 10 minutes, every day or every other day. And that coffee you
roast casually, while not to the caliber of top-flight roasters, is
nonetheless really fresh, single-origin coffee which far surpasses a \$9
bag of Starbucks.

Hardcore coffee roasting is a great hobby. But if you just want a really
good cup of coffee for Folger’s prices, casual home roasting is the way
to go.
