# Teaching

## Philosophy

My study of sacred rhetoric and experience as a teacher and learner has led me to the conclusion that **the classroom is a liturgical space.** By this I don't mean that my classes are religious services, but that effective learning experiences are governed by goal-directed habits and practices; that they have an embodied dimension; and that they are founded on human relationships. I take these to be realities of how people learn, not just a metaphor for the classroom. I have therefore built up practices over my working life as a teacher which acknowledge these realities and seek to employ them to best effect in each of my classes.

First, if the classroom is a liturgical space, an effective class will be governed by **appropriate habits directed toward the goals of the course.** Rather than just providing content, my courses aim to build certain intellectual habits in students as appropriate to the goals of the course. My writing courses don't just teach *that* revision is important, but aim to build a *habit* of revision; my introduction to literature does not just instruct students on the importance of great literature, but models the practice of reading well. Students thus learn the course content not so much because I tell them about it, but because they practice it in their assignments. I promote this habit formation through assignment structures that employ a high degree of repetition with enough variety to keep things interesting. For instance, my introduction to literature course employs daily writing assignments in a specific structure aimed at teaching close reading. With daily practice in this skill, students then are well-prepared for the course's longer paper assignments, which draw on similar structures, helping them acquire the habit of reading closely and writing with literature.

My classes foster this sense of structure and habit down to the level of a consistent daily routine for course meetings. My general education courses often begin each day with the in-class writing assignment as a way to get students thinking, while upper-level courses might begin with reading aloud from the day's text or a student presentation. This consistency helps foster student habit formation and a class culture, while also giving students a daily structure that quickly helps remove any uncertainty about course expectations and soothes anxiety.

Secondly, my courses are liturgical in they **acknowledge the role of the body** in learning. The disposition and status of our bodies affects our ability to learn and how we think about a particular interpersonal setting on a subconscious level. My courses stay attentive to this fact in both simple and more conceptual ways. I acknowledge how embodiment shapes learning through such simple practices as implementing regularly scheduled breaks in all my classes, or rearranging the classroom for in-class writing periods to allow students room to work and to consult with me individually.

More conceptually, I foreground the embodied experience of education by practices meant to draw on the affective and aesthetic components to learning. Students will respond to a class on a subconscious level according to the atmosphere of the room and the sounds and sights associated with it. I seek to bring that embodied dimension to bear in service to learning in all my classes. For that reason, I tend to employ analog rather than digital technologies where possible, preferring book and pen and paper for how they foreground the role of the body over digital tools. Where possible, I find it preferable for the embodied role of the class to have students engaging with a physical book or a beautifully designed manual handout over starting at yet another screen. At the same time, as something of an amateur technologist myself, I enjoy the challenge of bringing embodiment back into the digital spaces of a class, whether that class is primarily seated or digital. In those spaces, I employ social tools, audio and video to re-engage the body with the task of digital learning.

Finally, a liturgical understanding of pedagogy recognizes that education is grounded on relationships. Students learn best where they feel a connection to their instructor and to the other students in the course, and so my classes prioritize developing a class community through course policies and daily practices. On the level of course policy, I foster relationships through mutual accountability and a challenging course structure. Students in my classes know from the first day that deadlines will be rigorously enforced and the course workload will push them; at the same time, I make myself accountable to them for offering feedback within set periods (for instance, guaranteeing essay comments within two weeks) and for explaining explicitly any adjustments to the course. This mutual accountability and professional atmosphere, though students may find it intimidating at first, in fact creates an environment where expectations and clear and the class has the opportunity to bond over a shared challenge. Furthermore, my own openness and accountability to the class means that these deadlines are enforced not in a shaming manner, but simply as a condition of our life together as a class.

In daily class meetings, a regular class rhythm helps to build relationships. Students in my classes know from the outset that they will be regularly called on to speak in class following a steady rotation, either based around in-class writing or other daily assignments. This practice helps me ensure that all students have a stake in the class as well as raising voices of those who might not feel comfortable speaking in a less structured format. This formal structure for discussion yields vigorous class discussion, building relationships and rapport throughout the class.


mention course eval numbers (my general education courses consistently score as above average for "Excellent Teacher," while my major courses score near the top of the scale) and wrap up